[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the beginning
of modern age,
it's a thought that
this solar system--
what we now know as the solar
system-- is all that was.
That's the whole universe.
And if we come from anywhere,
we come from someplace
inside that universe.
Then, by the time
of last century--
or the 19th Century--
we knew that the solar
system is part of the galaxy.
But then, we saw that the
galaxy is all there is.
So we come from the galaxy.
If we come from the universe,
we come from the galaxy.
Then, it turned out that
this is just one of millions
of billions of galaxies.
So our vision is expanding.
Where we come from is
something far bigger,
far deeper than what we thought.
Where do the stars come from
if we come from the stars?
We come from this
universe, but where
did this universe come from?
That is now the question that is
being discussed more and more.
This universe
wasn't there always.
It came to be.
It evolved.
Now, the universe
was born probably--
according to the
best guesses today--
at the time of the Big Bang,
80.3 billion years ago,
more or less.
And this cosmic event
gave birth to everything
that we can now observe
in the universe.
It gave birth to the
observable universe.
Therefore, it gave birth
also to the seeds--
to the predecessors--
of living things.
So if we came from anywhere,
he came from the universe
that was born in the Big Bang.
And out of that, chaos
then gradually distilled
what we know as the universe--
distilled what we know are
the things in the universe.
So, also us.
Also, not us as we are now
but the origins of life.
The origins of everything--
planets, solar systems.
So if we ask, where
did we come from?
I would have to say, we come
from the deeper dimension which
became, then, the explicate,
the known, the perceivable order
of the universe.
This deeper level is
known by various names--
the deeper dimension.
Some people call it the akashic
dimension or the akashic field
or a grand unified field
or the implicate order,
according to David Bohm.
We are children of the cosmos.
Now, this very interesting
question, then, our origin
truly--
if it reaches back--
are we truly alive?
Are we truly part of
the deeper dimension?
Is there discoverable
still in us?
Are we truly beings
of the cosmos?
And I think the answer is yes.
Because who we are is not
just what we've always been.
It is what we have become.
And this who we are,
what we will become,
is not just a body, but it's
also a mind, a consciousness.
And that consciousness
very probably
has its roots in that
deeper dimension--
the dimension that
gave rise to everything
that there is,
including the laws that
circulates what there is.
The laws of nature
about which scientists--
such as Einstein among them--
said that when we really
discover them and take them
seriously, we recognize
that there must
be at work a great spirit--
a great mind must be
behind these laws,
because they are coherent.
They create an observable,
intelligible universe.
We are part of that
intelligible universe,
and we have co-created
that universe
with the laws that were
born at the same time
that we were born.
When was this?
Now we enter the
deepest mysteries.
We can't say what was
there before the Big Bang.
Probably it was a
field of potentials--
a field where everything
that is possible to happen
could have its
happening possibility.
If there was anything
prior to the Big Bang,
it was as an intelligence.
It was a cosmic mind.
In Christian origins,
we talk about the word.
The word was, in the
beginning there was the word.
It was the logos.
In the Eastern religions,
the same idea crops up--
the intelligence, the
dao, whatever we call it.
The brahmin was there first.
And everything else
developed out of that.
You say now, am I
talking mysticism or am I
talking science?
I'm talking science
with its roots
on the same dimension from
where mysticism also stems.
This universe is
a mystic universe.
It's a miraculous universe.
Over 100 years ago, the
great astronomer James Jeans
said the universe
resembles a big thought
more than a big mechanism.
And sure enough, more
and more we investigate
the finest, the smallest
details, the deepest
elements of this
universe, the more
we find that it is more
like a great thought--
that it is information, that
it is something intelligible.
A very, very different
concept from what
there was 50 years ago, but
still is there in so-called
"mainstream science,"
much of what
is being taught today
in universities.
But if you really contemplate
this question-- who are we;
where we come from--
you must say we have
to go beyond that.
Because in the new
quantum sciences,
we recognize that what
there is in the world
is a quantum system.
The great scientist
Max Planck said,
after 40 years of studying,
the deepest elements
of this physical reality--
which means the atoms--
I can tell you one thing,
there is no such thing
as matter in the universe.
What is there?
He said, what there is
is a set of vibrations
that are held together
by a force that creates
the atom from the
atoms that created
the molecules, and the
supermolecular objects--
the many things that we can
observe, that we can touch--
and all of those
are finally sets
of vibration acting together.
And as Planck said, this force
that holds the atom together--
the proton and the neutron--
and then the electrons
that come into this--
that we must consider
as an intelligence--
a cosmic intelligence.
Wherever we look, however
we look at the world,
its origins are beyond
matter, beyond even energy
in a conventional form.
What are the origins then?
Where we come from
and, therefore,
indirectly, who we are--
the answer to that is
in formed vibration--
in formed energy-- energy
in the form of vibration.
Because when we examine
the smallest parts,
no matter is there.
What there is is vibration
of a given frequency,
phase, magnitude.
And these vibrations,
when they are in phase,
they create structures.
They create things that appear
as though they have a material.
So we are, ourselves,
clusters or sets of vibration
that appear as though we
were solid material bodies.
But we are more than that.
I simply call it, nowadays--
to give the simplest
possible term
that is acceptable to
modern science also--
I call it an attractor.
An attractor is something that
acts within a complex system
and makes it behave
in a certain way.
This universe is not
a random universe, not
a chance universe.
This attractor is
in the universe;
it's part of the universe.
At its deepest level
is the information
of the energy that makes up
this universe, makes what it is.
The universe is not
what you thought it was.
It's a quantum system.
More exactly, it's a
macroscopic, highly-integrated
quantum system.
What you're
recognizing now, that
in this remarkable universe--
a truly mysterious
universe that we
are decoding little by little--
that all things act together.
All things act as one.
What quantum
science teaches us--
any part of a quantum
system is not local.
It's also present
in every other part.
You can't act local.
There is nothing local.
No causality.
No push and pull, no
affect and cause is local.
Whatever you do is penetrating
throughout this system.
It's part of that system, and
we are part of the system.
How we come in --
think we come from beyond, it
can be very easily illustrated.
This beyond, where the
laws of nature reside--
that is something
like the laws--
the laws, let's say of a game--
laws of cards, laws
of chess or whatever.
These laws are given
and you play the game.
You don't play with the laws.
The laws are already given.
The laws just tell you
how you can play the game.
And they're the
same for the novice
and for the grand
master in chess.
The laws are what this
universe is fundamentally.
And it's not the game.
It's what governs the game.
So we talk about
the laws of nature,
we can no longer say that
they are part of the universe.
No.
They were there when
the universe was born;
and they will be there,
as far as we can tell,
when the universe will end.
Because that's also the
case that this universe
is not a permanent feature
of reality or the cosmos.
Because if there is one thing
we recognize more and more--
and this is also fairly recent,
surprisingly recent in science
also-- it's not recent in
religion and spirituality--
namely, the idea that
there is a higher will,
a higher intellect, that
governs the evolution of things
in the universe and of
the universe itself--
the structure itself.
It all hangs together.
And this evolution
is not random--
not just one darned
thing after another.
As philosophers used
to say not so long ago,
describe what the universe
really is, they would say,
it's just one darned
thing after another.
They're recognizing more that
the universe is progressing
from chaos to order.
And you're part of
this progression.
Our consciousness,
our body expresses
this in different ways.
We are part of an evolutionary
process that is nonrandom,
because we can go as far
as saying there is nothing
random in the universe.
Why?
Because there is nothing
disconnected from anything
in the universe.
It all hangs together.
Whatever you do
here and now also
affects everything
there and then.
So all this progress is--
to use a good term suggested
in a different context
by the great psychiatrist,
a good friend
of mine, Stanislav Grof--
he uses the term "holotropic."
"Holo" means oneness in Greek.
"Tropic" means tropicus.
Tropism means something
that you tend toward.
A fish, towards
food has a tropism.
Even bacteria has tropisms.
And, of course, our instincts--
everything that we are
has a tropistic element.
We are tending towards some
direction rather than another.
And so does the universe.
All of evolution is
holotropic in that sense.
All elements work together,
and they need to, as it were.
In human life-- in any
life, any living system--
they need to work together.
Because if they don't,
life is no longer capable.
Life is not possible except
in a quantum coherent system.
On the physical
level, the objective
is to maintain this system,
this living system that is us.
And if we are healthy,
if we are normal,
we are part of this drive.
We obey it.
We live it.
We express it.
Intuitive people express it.
So-called primitive cultures,
who are far from primitive,
they express it.
They knew it.
Animals know it without
being able to verbalize
it or conceptualize it.
And we, with our ability
to conceptualize,
to put together and
interpret things,
we are interpreting this drive,
and we are mis-apprehending--
misinterpreting it very often.
We're interpreting it as a
drive for power, for domination,
in the human world, for wealth.
We are interpreting it as
we first, our country first,
never mind the rest.
We are replacing this
inherent oneness,
which is there in the evolution
of all life in the universe--
we're interpreting
it as competition,
where the fittest survives.
This is not that
kind of a universe.
This is not this kind of nature.
Sure, there is
competition in nature.
There appears to
be also violence.
But it's always toward
a larger objective.
The deeper objective
in nature is always
the survival of a species,
the maintenance of the species
within that context.
And the context is always and
ultimately the web of life--
the system of life
on this planet.
And one day, I think
we will discover
that the system of
life on this planet
is part of a larger
system of life
elsewhere in this universe.
This will be an
incredible sophistry
to believe that we alone
possess intelligence,
we alone are living.
We are part of an
ongoing evolution of life
and of consciousness
in this universe.
To recognize it, that is
one great challenge for us.
And I mean recognize-- there's
a hyphen if you write it--
re-cognize.
Because we have cognized it--
classical cultures,
traditional cultures.
The Mystery Schools
have known this.
Now, we need to
re-cognize it on the basis
of scientific evidence.
And when we talk
about "new science,"
that's the new science.
New science is a science
of oneness and science
of striving together
toward a higher objective.
The big challenge is that
we, with our conscious mind,
we can mis-apprehend this.
We can misinterpret this.
We are free to develop valid
interpretations, valid ideas
based on our experience.
We are also free to
disregard those experiences,
free to misconstrue them.
It's a very
interesting phenomenon
that what we believe so
strongly influences what we see.
It used to be said that what
we see is what we believe.
We believe what we see.
Both ways it works, sure enough.
As a skeptic, we
believe what we see,
but also to recognize that
we see what we believe.
Because if we strongly
disbelieve something-- you say,
that's nonsense;
that cannot be--
you don't see it.
The evidence may be
there in front of us.
We don't see it or we
see it as something else.
It takes a long time
for something unfamiliar
to be built into something
that is familiar;
that if it has a deeper root,
accept that this information is
coming to us from that same
drive that is behind evolution.
Then, we can also
recognize things--
re-cognize things-- that
you otherwise disbelieve.
So there we are at the cusp
of an evolutionary process.
We built it up to a
point where it really
is in question whether
it can continue this way.
It has become unstable.
But instability is fine, because
without instability there
is no change, there
is no progress.
Things progress-- things move--
when the previous level
of being of that system
has become unstable, untenable.
Then we move, then we
search, then we finally find,
hopefully, or we disappear.
But if we survive, we
move on to something else.
And this cusp at which
we find ourselves
is precisely that
moment in history
where things either change
or they become extinct.
The great overwhelming majority
of species on this planet
have become extinct.
The human species
is not so old--
as a conscious
species, 50,000 years;
perhaps as a biological
species, maybe 3 million,
3.5 million years.
But as a conscious
species, able reason,
able to interpret
things, and therefore,
able to choose a
faulty direction,
that is recent, and is
the power that we now
have through technology.
We can implement our
poor interpretations.
A great danger.
Freedom is opportunity.
Freedom is the greatest value.
But it's also danger,
because opportunity
is to develop the good as
well as to develop the bad,
only if you go in on the issue.
Go back to the drive
that has created
this universe, which is living
in us, which is part of us.
Only if you do that do we
find the right interpretation,
do we find who we are.
I sound like a mystique perhaps,
but I can quote none other
than Erwin Schrodinger,
one of the greatest
physicists of our day, who
said, consciousness is one.
To use consciousness
in the plural
is misapprehend
it, to mistake it.
There is no sense in
which we can think
of consciousness in the plural.
Ultimately, there is
one consciousness.
And Einstein agreed.
He said, this is a kind
of an optical illusion
to think of consciousness
as residing severally
in each of us separately.
We are one
consciousness, one mind,
and that same mind stems from
this dimension which created
all things in the universe--
from the atoms to the amoeba to
the seeds of the simplest plant
to the algae to the
complex organisms
to societies of
organisms to ecosystems
to entire societies in our
global society of human beings.
It's all a product
of this drive--
drive towards oneness,
drive towards wholeness.
But if you now say
that these systems--
from the simplest to
the most complex--
also have a mental dimension--
a mental pull.
Again, the great philosopher
Alfred North Whitehead
talked about the physical
pull and the mental pull
of all the things which he
called the "actual entities."
All things are actual
entities, and they all
have a mental pull, as well.
Mysticism is the best guess
that we have in science
as to how our mind operates.
Our mind, it operates,
it's there, even when
the brain is turned off.
How do we know this?
The evidence is manifold today.
It's there in the near-death
experiences most explicitly,
because people who have
near-death experiences,
very often, they
are in hospitals
and they're hooked
up to instrumentation
that shows the waves of their
movement of their brain.
And there are periods--
not for everybody, obviously--
but there is very often--
many, many cases--
when this is flatlined.
The line is flat.
The brain doesn't operate
in any normal way.
And during this
period, the individuals
are in a given setting,
they're exposed
to sights and
sounds, happenings,
and then they come back.
And if they come
back-- not always,
but often they do come back
to normal functioning--
they describe in detail what
happened during the time
that their brain was flatlined.
How is that possible?
Today, even the
greatest skeptics
admit that this is
possible, not because they
are convinced by arguments
but because they lived it.
There was a case of a famous
Harvard neurosurgeon--
Eben Alexander-- who spent
seven days in deep coma,
where there was no possibility--
as he would have said before--
no possibility of any
conscious experience.
When he came back--
which was half of a miracle,
because he was given up
by standard medical science--
when he came back, he described
in detail what happened
in ways that are verifiable.
We are no longer entitled
to believe that all we are
is a series of brain functions
in the cerebellum, which
produce, as kind of a
byproduct, sensations.
And these sensations,
we call consciousness.
So when you turn off the
system, the sensations stop.
Sure enough, they stop,
but the sensations
may exist outside the brain.
Maybe the ancient
insight is true;
namely, that there
is life beyond.
Call it the "soul," call it the
"spirit," whatever we call it--
I prefer to call it
just a consciousness--
a cosmic consciousness--
which operates in us.
And we can explain this now
fairly well modern concepts.
Because think of it--
this cosmic consciousness
could be like a hologram.
A hologram is a system
of information such
that every part is represented
in every other part.
Because say that
in the hologram,
the totality of the information,
that creates the image.
Whatever the hologram is is
present in every small part.
And we can show this.
This is scientifically
proveable.
You don't have to have
a complete hologram.
It's enough to take a classical
projector-- a slide projector--
or anything that projects
an image, you see.
Take the lens out of it.
What you get then is what is
known as the optical arrays.
You don't see everything
because all of the elements
is present simultaneously
together on the screen
if you project it
toward the screen.
Then, you take off your glasses
and you hold the glasses
in front of the screen--
anywhere in front of the screen.
The total image appears
very small behind the glass
on the screen.
This is known as
distributed information.
Information is most local.
And we can say this cosmic
consciousness, which
is present in all of us,
is distributed information.
It is something that we
receive, we can decode.
What the brain does is
decodes it, it transmits it.
It makes it perceivable.
But doesn't just make it,
that consciousness is present.
So you might ask, so
is everything that we
perceive such a consciousness?
No.
Obviously, the inner
consciousness in our mind,
there are many elements
that come from the senses.
We see sights or we hear sounds.
We taste tastes, etc.
So our consciousness is filled
with sensory information.
The big mistake of
modern times was that we
saw that that's all there is.
There is more to it.
We all have experiences
that go beyond the senses.
They are called
transcendental experiences.
But there's a whole
school on transcendental,
transpersonal psychology
and psychiatry,
investigating in detail the
elements of consciousness that
cannot be derived from sensory
information conveyed from
the five senses to the brain.
There are things that happen--
near-death experience is one.
Out-of-body experiences
very frequent as well.
And there are
spontaneous intuitions.
You might ask, do I
have such intuitions?
I might say yes.
I am not I mystique.
I try to be a philosopher--
a philosopher of science.
But whether I like it or not,
I do have such experiences.
They appear in the form of
a spontaneous but otherwise
inexplicable guidance.
When I work on a problem,
when I work on something,
when I think about it,
when I write something,
work on something, I think about
it day or night, all the time.
And very often, ideas
come to the surface.
And these ideas are not
rational ideas, not sensory--
produced ideas.
They come.
They come very often in
these half conscious states
between sleep and awakeness--
awakening-- the
hypnogogic state.
They come meditation.
And this is not
inexplicable in the sense
if you are dealing with a
holographic consciousness
of which we are an expression.
Because then we are part of the
consciousness of other people.
We are part of the
consciousness of predecessors.
It's open whether we are part
of the experience of also
of people who come after us.
Because is the future
also part of the hologram?
I won't deal with that.
I don't know.
But I can say the past is.
The past is there
in the present.
And whatever happens to
us, it has been informed.
It's not the first time
we live in the sense
that the consciousness
that is operating in us
has been picking up information
from other existences
from other lives.
Whether it's literally us,
that's a moot question.
It's something
that we experience.
Who is us?
If you just say this
is limited to our body,
then it wasn't us, because this
body after awhile will be dead.
But if it's us in terms of the
consciousness that we possess,
then, yes.
Then we are the hologram.
We are part of it.
Because we have gone so far
now in ignoring this dimension
that we have created
tensions that
are leading to almost
critical instabilities
in the world around us.
The future is in our hands.
And the great fortunate lemma
to this statement is that
the "our" of which the future is
in the hands of-- this "our" is
a multidimensional,
deeply conscious being--
a being who can
be one in the way
that the system can operate.
Our Earth system cannot operate
as a plurality of conflicting
elements.
And that's what
we are doing now.
We cannot fight each other and
hope that somehow out of these
many conflicts something will
happen that will maintain
the system.
By "system," I don't mean
just energy and matter.
I mean it's also a set
of relationships that
makes the web of
life a global quantum
system on this planet,
where everybody can live,
where everybody has a chance
to develop, to evolve.
That's cause for becoming
one, for cooperating,
for acting as one.
And it is possible, because
our consciousness is one.
We can believe Carl Jung
who said the same thing
about the unus mundus, one
world, one consciousness
in the world.
So where did we
get the guidance?
We get it from us, from inside.
We have it there.
We wouldn't have survived
as individuals so far.
Every child has it.
As we said, every animal has it.
Every living thing has it.
We have disregarded
it, ignored it.
But now we know and the time
has come to take seriously
who we are, who we
really truly are--
a quantum system informed
by a quantum consciousness.
I know it sounds--
it sounds esoteric.
It sounds mysticist.
But if we interpret correctly
and deeply the findings that's
coming now from the cutting
edge sciences, sciences both
of the brain, of the universe,
of the physical domain,
of the biological
systems, all of this
tell us we are basically
quantum systems interacting
with each other
and being guided,
I think, being governed by
a holotropic consciousness.
That's my religion,
if you ask me.
And I'd say that this is not
religion in a classical sense.
It is close to some
Eastern religions--
close to Buddhism, to Taoism.
But it's close also
to the Old Testament.
And it's also close
to the teachings
of Jesus, who was
alternately teaching
love and oneness as the
goal, as the objective
of our earthly existence.
What we have to change is the
superficial interpretations,
the symbolic packages in which
these deep spiritual insights
have come down to
us and have become
part of a power hierarchy
in every organized religion.
We can go back
beyond the religions
and form a religion of our
own-- a spiritual community,
which is, at the same time,
a scientific community.
Authentic spirituality
stems from the same root
as deep science does.
The origins are there.
The great prophets are the
great religious leaders
and the great scientists,
great thinkers.
It's all one.
I was fortunate in coming
toward these insights
by having spent my childhood
as an artist, as a concert
pianist, having made my living,
actually, giving concerts
in public in all
parts of the world,
until I was in my mid-30s.
And the experience I
had on the concert stage
was a deep spiritual
experience--
is the experience of
what you could, today,
express with the word--
I know it's
controversial, but I know
it's very, very meaningful,
very appropriate.
The word is love.
The experience of love
for all things around me,
for creating a single
domain, a single sphere
of unconditional perpetual
love around with me.
That's when you're
really playing music.
That's when you're not
just following notes,
then you're harmonized.
They are one with the world.
And that experience stayed with
me as I left the concert stage.
And when I write,
I write and speak
on the basis of
scientific findings,
but I put them together--
I interpret them
in ways that also
correspond to my experience.
And that's the opportunity
that I want to pursue--
this opportunity of
bringing out to people
this insight that we have a
deeper eye, a deeper oneness.
And we are not alone.
We don't need to go to other
planets to find our community.
The community is here.
It's the community of all life.
And together, we can make
this a living community.
Because, today, we
need to transform.
We need to change.
The community that we
now have is vulnerable.
It is heading toward
greater conflicts.
And if we pursue on
this path, the future
is not going to be bright.
It's not going to be, at
least for human beings.
[MUSIC PLAYING]